BEASTKIN Born between civilization and the wilds, beastkin are as varied as the animal kingdom itself. Sometimes called wildkin or werefolk, beastkin universally share the bipedal form of humans, elves, or dwarves, but have pronounced traits of a specific beast, such as hawk wings, a scorpion’s tail, rabbit ears, owl eyes, a crab-like carapace, razor-sharp shark teeth, or bony ox horns. Some beastkin show only slight bestial features, while others resemble bipedal versions of their animal kin. Some beastkin believe they are relatives of the intelligent beasts that hold court in the fey realms. Others claim they are descendants of lycanthropes or other magically transformed beings. Whatever the case, all beastkin share a tie to the natural world, and many choose to live alongside the animals they resemble. Young beastkin are often driven by curiosity to seek out other civilizations and far-flung environments. Though such wanderlust may last for years, most beastkin return to their natural homes in later life, where they often act as wardens of their home territory. W hile all beastkin contend with primal urges, they are quick to form unshakable bonds with those who show them compassion and loyalty, whether humanoid or beast. BEASTKIN LINEAGE TRAITS Your beastkin character has the following hereditary traits. Age. Beastkin mature far more quickly than most Humanoids, reaching adulthood within 5 years. Though they may live nearly a century, some beastkin live only 20 or 30 years. Size. Your size is Medium or Small. Beastkin vary in weight and height, depending on their Beast characteristics. Most are between 4 and 8 feet tall, but if you choose to play a beastkin shorter than 4 feet, you can choose your size to be Small. Your weight varies depending on your Beast characteristics. For example, a Medium beastkin descended from bears likely weighs upward of 350 pounds, while an avian beastkin of the same size is likely to weigh around 100 pounds. Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. Animal Instinct. You have proficiency in either the Perception or Survival skill (your choice). Natural Weapons. You have claws, horns, hooves, fangs, spines, or a similar adaptation that serves as a natural weapon. Work with your GM to determine what type of 105 3  LINEAGE & HERITAGEnatural weapon you possess and decide whether it does bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing damage. You can use your natural weapon to make unarmed strikes. When you hit with it, the strike deals 1d6 + your STR or DEX modifier damage (choose which during character creation) of your chosen type, instead of the bludgeoning damage normal for an unarmed strike. Natural Adaptation. You inherit one of the following traits determined by what kind of animal characteristics you want your character to have: • Avian. Leathery, feathery, or gossamer wings sprout from your back or connect to your outstretched arms. You have a flying speed equal to your walking speed. You can’t fly while wearing medium or heavy armor. Carrying a heavy load or a creature of your size or larger while flying reduces your speed by half. • Agile. Sharp claws, cloven hooves, robust limbs, reversed joints, or suction pads on your hands and feet allow you to scrabble up trees, rock faces, and uneven surfaces with ease. You have a climbing speed equal to your walking speed. In addition, you have advantage on saves made to avoid being knocked prone. • Aquatic. Oily fur, scales, fins, webbed hands and feet, or long, gangly limbs are common for your people. You have a swimming speed equal to your walking speed. You can hold your breath for up to 20 minutes. • Sturdy. Powerful limbs, fat reserves, or a thick hide allow you to endure harm and accomplish feats of remarkable athleticism. When you aren’t wearing armor, you have a natural AC of 13 + your DEX modifier. In addition, you count as one size larger when determining your carrying capacity and the weight you can push or drag. DWARF Dwarves are a hardy people, as sturdy and solid as stone. Most dwarves believe they were sculpted from living rock and were given life in the forge of a progenitor god. T he first dwarven cities were built below the world’s surface, filling chiseled mountain halls and sprawling caverns deep within the earth. Plentiful ore and minerals led to mastery of stoneworking and metalworking, giving these first dwarves tools to survive the monsters lurking near their homes. As ages passed, dwarves spread across many lands. Some chose lives far from their ancestral halls. However, dwarves still bear many adaptations that allowed their ancestors to thrive, including vision suited for sunless caverns and resistances to the poisonous denizens of the world below. 106 DWARF LINEAGE TRAITS Your dwarf character has the following hereditary traits. Age. Dwarves are physically mature around age 20, but most consider themselves young until they reach age 50. On average, they live about 350 years. Size. Your size is Medium. Dwarves vary little in height or size, with most standing between 4 and 5 feet tall. Even the smallest dwarves possess broad frames and rarely weigh less than 150 pounds. Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. Darkvision. You have darkvision to a range of 60 feet. Dwarven Resilience. You have advantage on saves against becoming poisoned, and you are resistant to poison damage. Dwarven Toughness. Your hit point maximum increases by 1, and it increases by 1 every time you gain a level. ELF Elves are a long-lived people, regarded as the first mortal beings to walk the world. They boast ancestral ties to magic realms populated by immortal creatures. Some elves claim that their ancestors were themselves immortal beings made mortal to steward newborn lands. Most elven settlements were established before any living memory. These beautiful cities are situated in quiet groves deep within ancient forests or atop mist-shrouded peaks that touch the sky—rich in magic and in beauty. PLAYER'S GUIDEDue to their long lifespans, even elves born far from elven cities eventually feel compelled to visit the towering forests and windswept peaks so beloved by their ancestors. These compulsions also drive elves to deepen bonds with other creatures who share their long lifespan. ELF LINEAGE TRAITS Your elf character has the following hereditary traits. Age. Although elves reach physical maturity around age 20, mental and emotional faculties reach full maturity around the age of 100. Elves can live to be 750 years old. Size. Your size is Medium. Elves range from under 5 feet to over 6 feet tall and tend toward slender builds, averaging around 110 pounds. Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. Heightened Senses. You have advantage on Perception checks that rely on sight or hearing. You can see through lightly obscured areas normally and areas of dim light as if it were bright light. Magic Ancestry. You have advantage on saves against being charmed, and magic can’t put you to sleep. Trance. Elves don’t need to sleep. Instead, they enter a meditative trance state, remaining semiconscious for 4 hours a day. You choose whether or not you can dream while meditating. After resting in this way, you gain the same benefit that other creatures do from 8 hours of sleep. HUMAN Humans are the youngest people of the world, and their tenacity and flexibility has allowed them to quickly spread. Humans are diverse in appearance and culture, so it’s not surprising that their creation myths are similarly plentiful. Despite, or perhaps as a consequence of their tangled history, humans leave their stamp wherever they go. A natural drive fills their lives with dreams of long-lasting achievements. More than just a few reach those dreams. Humans are found in nearly every environment, in nearly every form of community. Humans crop up even in surprising places with an adaptability and a burning desire to succeed. HUMAN LINEAGE TRAITS Your human character has the following hereditary traits. Age. Humans reach adulthood in their late teenage years and rarely live to be more than 100 years old. Size. Your size is Medium or Small. Humans vary in height and weight, but most adults range between 5 feet and 6 feet tall and average around 150 pounds. If you choose to play a human shorter than 4 feet however, you can choose your size to be Small. 107 3  LINEAGE & HERITAGESpeed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. Ambitious. You gain proficiency in one skill of your choice, and you gain one talent of your choice. This talent can be from any of the talent lists, but you must meet the talent’s prerequisites if any are required (see Talents in Chapter 4). KOBOLD Kobolds are a cunning people with draconic features. Many kobolds believe ancient dragons made kobolds in their likeness, to serve their draconic masters. Cagey and strategic, these diminutive draconic humanoids instinctually seek safety in tunnels and similar enclosed spaces such as collapsed architecture or rubble. Kobolds display an inborn mechanical aptitude which often manifests as trap-making and tinkering. The crafting of traps became such a monumental part of kobold civilization that those rare kobolds born away from their own people still gravitate toward occupations and hobbies that allow them to craft small, potentially dastardly, creations. Though they can live for decades, a penchant for curiosity claims as many kobold lives as time does. KOBOLD LINEAGE TRAITS Your kobold character has the following hereditary traits. Age. Kobolds reach adulthood in their early teenage years and reach elderly status around the age of 80. Kobolds rarely live to be more than 100 years old. Size. Your size is Small. Kobolds are rarely more than 3 feet tall, and tend toward extremes of body weight. However, you can choose to play a rare oversized type of kobold known as a truescale. Truescales stand around 5 feet tall and are Medium size. Your size determines which trait you have access to via the Natural Adaptation feature. Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. Darkvision. You have darkvision to a range of 60 feet. Tinker’s Fascination. Your innate fascination with how things work allows you to use tools with ease. When you make an ability check with a tool, you can roll a d8 and add the result to the check. Natural Adaptation. You inherited one of the following unique traits, determined by your size. • Fierce (Small). When a Large or larger creature you  can see within 5 feet of you attacks you, you can use your reaction to attack that creature immediately after its attack. • Truescale (Medium). Your naturally thick scales provide significant protection. You have a natural AC of 13 + your DEX modifier. In addition, you have resistance to one of following types of damage: acid, cold, fire, lightning, or poison (choose during character creation). ORC Orcs are a resilient people, whose origin was sudden and forceful. Indeed, many orcish priests believe they are blessed by the god of war. Though scholars and historians claim they’ve seen no sign of sprawling orcish empires, many orcs sing songs of glittering realms, crowded battlefields, and military brilliance against unknown foes— and some long-lived creatures remember a time before the orcs’ unexpected appearance. Despite their relatively short lives, orcs are driven by a powerful thirst for exploration and discovery. Even orcs born far away from orcish communities gravitate toward a life of travel, adventure, and thrill seeking. Due to their extraordinary survivability, orcs have been found desiccated within desert temples, locked within frozen lakes, and entombed in collapsed tunnels, only to make a full recovery within days of being freed. ORC LINEAGE TRAITS Your orc character has the following hereditary traits. Age. Orcs reach adulthood within two decades and seldom live longer than 60 years. However, orcs remain in their prime for most of their lives, undergoing few physical changes or signs of aging between adulthood and the end of their natural lifespan. Size. Your size is Medium. Orcs stand between 6 and 8 feet tall and commonly range from 110 to 350 pounds in weight. Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. Heightened Senses. You have advantage on Perception checks that rely on sight or hearing. You can see through lightly obscured areas normally and areas of dim light as if it were bright light. 108 PLAYER'S GUIDEOrcish Perseverance. When you would die due to suffocating or gaining levels of exhaustion, you instead enter a death-like stasis. While in stasis you are incapacitated, can’t move, can’t speak, and are unaware of your surroundings. You also cease to age, and your body is protected from decay. You can remain in this state until you are restored by mundane or magical healing, or your body is completely destroyed. Stalwart. When you are subjected to an effect that requires you to make a save at the end of your turn, you can instead choose to make the save at the start of your turn. SYDEREAN Sydereans (sigh-DEER-ee-ans) are mystical beings sired by creatures or powers from a different plane of existence. Sometimes called starborn or plane-touched, their origins are as varied and mysterious as the cosmic forces that shaped them. T hough sydereans may be conceived by the physical union of a mortal with an outsider—such as a celestial or fiend—such pairings are rare and steeped in portents or conspiracy. More often, sydereans are born to an unsuspecting mortal family perhaps as the result of magical upheaval, an ancient dormant trait within the family’s bloodline, or a reincarnated soul returned by some unknown design. There are even instances of fully grown humanoids suddenly transformed into a syderean in a flash of light or a burst of smoke. All sydereans live between two worlds: that of their mortal peers and a world connected to their indwelling magic. Sydereans may be shaped by celestials, born of f iends, or derived from less understood entities. Regardless of parentage, sydereans aren't bound to the cosmic laws that govern their sires. They are the masters of their own destinies, free to embrace, reject, or ignore the cosmic struggles of their immortal kin. PLAYER ADVICE Note that a save made with the Stalwart trait is the first thing that happens at the start of the PC’s turn, superseding any other effects that may trigger at the start of the turn. This distinction is important in certain circumstances. For example, if a PC is suffering an ongoing effect that deals damage at the start of their turn until they succeed on a save at the end of their turn, the Stalwart trait gives the PC the chance to end the ongoing damage effect before they take the damage. 109 3  LINEAGE & HERITAGESydereans can be found among any humanoid culture, but often gravitate toward large cities, where they can skip the scrutiny of a village life. Sydereans welcomed by mortal peers often find success as clergy, leaders, or arcane scholars. The less fortunate might avoid civilization entirely, seeking solitude, embracing banditry, or adopting lives dedicated to travel and adventure. SYDEREAN LINEAGE TRAITS Your syderean character has the following hereditary traits. Age. Sydereans reach adulthood by the age of 20. On average, they live about 150 years. Size. Your size is Medium. Sydereans stand between 5 and 7 feet tall and average 160 pounds. Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. Far Sight. You have darkvision to a range of 60 feet and can see in magical darkness to a range of 30 feet. Otherworldly Form. You have resistance to necrotic damage and the amount of time you can survive without air, food, water, or sleep is double that of a typical character. Natural Adaptation. You have inherited one set of the following unique traits, determined by the nature of the forces that shaped you. • Celestial. You possess notable physical characteristics that mark your connection to realms of good or order. You might have luminous eyes, metallic-hued skin, or possess the ability to stay perfectly still for hours. You also gain the following: Blessed Guise. Once per long rest, you can use a bonus action to assume an otherworldly guise for 1 minute. When you do so, you sprout spectral wings and gain a flying speed equal to your walking speed for the duration of your transformation. While transformed, once on each of your turns when you deal damage with an attack or spell, you can choose to convert the damage type (or types) to radiant damage. • Fiendish. You possess notable physical characteristics that mark your connection to realms of evil or chaos. You might bear bony horns that jut from your skull, emit a perpetual odor of smoke, or have a barbed tail. You also gain the following: Dreadful Guise. Once per long rest, you can use a bonus action to assume an otherworldly guise for 1 minute. While the transformation lasts, creatures of your choice that come within 10 feet of you for the first time on a turn or start their turn there must succeed on a CHA save (DC equals 10 + your PB) or become frightened of you until the end of your next turn. Once a creature succeeds on this save, they can’t be affected by this feature again for 24 hours. While transformed, once on each of your turns when you deal damage with an attack or spell, you can choose to convert the damage type (or types) to necrotic or fire damage (your choice). 110 SMALLFOLK Smallfolk are diminutive humanoids who rely on community and cleverness to survive a world of big threats. These brave people have walked the land for centuries but are largely overlooked in historical accounts, since they are rarely perceived to be a threat by larger peoples, or “bigfolk.” All smallfolk share a near-supernatural affinity for the earth, and distinct groups of smallfolk are categorized by how they embraced that affinity. One group, gnomes, split off to build communities almost entirely underground. T he other group, halflings, remained on the surface to build farming communities. Regardless of where they choose to live, smallfolk possess boundless enthusiasm for improving the world around them. Their ancestral homes are filled with bounteous creature comforts resulting from ingenuity and hard work. W hile many smallfolk contentedly live their lives in cozy communities with others of their kind, a seemingly bottomless zest for life drives more adventurous members of this lineage to travel the world or settle in more unusual climes. Smallfolk fit in wherever they go, and troubles seem to roll off their backs magically—qualities that have ensured their success spreading across the world. PLAYER'S GUIDESMALLFOLK LINEAGE TRAITS Your smallfolk character has the following hereditary traits. Age. Smallfolk reach adulthood around 20 and typically live to be around 150 years old, though gnomes sometimes live twice as long. Size. Your size is Small. Smallfolk are rarely more than 3 feet tall and average about 40 pounds. Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. Grounded. Once per day, when you fail a save, you can reroll the die and use the new roll. Regardless of whether the new roll is a success or failure, you generate 1 Luck. Small Stature. You can move through the space of any creature that is Medium or larger size. You can also attempt to hide when you are obscured by a creature of Medium or larger size. Natural Adaptation. You inherited one of the following unique traits, determined by whether your characteristics are gnomish or halfling: • Gnomish. Your ancestors made their homes underground or in dark woodlands, providing you with darkvision to a range of 60 feet. In addition, you learn the minor illusion cantrip. Choose whether INT, WIS, or CHA is your spellcasting ability for this spell during character creation. • Halfling. Your ancestors made their homes on the surface, displaying outsized pluck to drive back hostile wildlife and monsters. You have advantage on saves against being charmed or frightened